Okay, so great news. Now that we've talked about APIs and we've talked about
earlier kind of some of the definitions of labor statistics, we're going to
actually use the data that we've downloaded from the BLS API and explore what's
been happening into the labor markets in the United States. So the first thing
we're going to do is we're going to take the two data sets that we just
downloaded from the BLS API and we're just going to read them in as raw data.
The first thing we need to do, so if we checked what data.detypes told us, we
would notice that everything was of type object when clearly the values, so if
we did data.head, the value column should have a numeric type. So the first thing
we're going to do is just convert that to a numeric type. Next, again, if we
look at data.detypes, we'll notice that we have a column a year and then this
column of period name has the name of a month, so September, August, which
corresponds with period. So we have date information and the right thing to do
is to put this date information into a date time object. So what we're going to
use is our apply function and we're going to use it row by row. And once and it's
going to take a row and it's going to put a string, it's going to return a string
that has one the month name and then the year name. And then we're going to pass
that to the date time. So in this first row, it would return one September, 2020,
then one August, 2020, et cetera, et cetera. Once we've done that, we can drop any of
the information related to the date other than the new column we've created. So we'll
go ahead and drop year period, period name and latest. Then we're going to sort the
values by their series ID and their date time. And this is just going to reorder
the columns. Voila. So now we have series ID date time and value. And next, we're going
to rename the CPS labor force status columns. So in particular, we're going to take
employed and map it to the lower case word employed, unemployed to unemployed. And
now we're going to take all of the labor force flows columns. So labor force flows,
labor force flows, labor force flows. And these are the rates transition rates that we
talked about before. So we have the e to e rate, which is employed to employed e to
you, you to e and you to you. And in the replace column. So if you read the metadata,
dot replace documentation, it actually tells us that if we pass a dictionary, we can do
a couple of different things with it. But if we pass a dictionary that has column names
and then passes in a new dictionary. So this would be a column name and this would be
a current value. And this would be the value you'd like to replace it with. We can replace
just values in a particular column. So what we're doing here is we're saying look at the
metadata. Oh, that's only look at two. Look at the metadata data frame. Take the CPS
labor force status column and use this dictionary to replace the values here with the values in
the dictionary. So it's going to map this employed to the lower case employed, et cetera,
et cetera. And we can see that that worked. Okay, the next thing we're going to do is we're
just going to dump all of the extra information. So in addition to kind of these CPS labor force
statuses, we have information on the demographics and the race, gender, marital statuses, et cetera.
And so all we're going to do is we're just going to keep the most basic information. So
we're only going to look at all industries, all occupations. We're going to look at the
not seasonally adjusted data. We're going to look at all races, both sexes. And so we're
going to apply that in this query. And then we're only going to look at the values that are
associated with a value from the when the CPS labor force status column is associated with a value
from our dictionary from the previous slide. And so this will give us. So you see it dumped a
bunch of before they were employed employed. The difference was this had min for employed. And
so now we've dumped that because we only take both sexes and we ended up with an E as our second
element. Okay, so next we're going to merge our two data frames together. So we have the call the
data frame data, data frame. And then we have the metadata, LF data frame for labor force.
And from this data frame, we only care about the series ID, which we need to do the merge,
and these new variable names that we're going to use. Additionally, we're going to specify the
how equals right because we only want to keep observations from data where the series ID
corresponds to a value in our restricted metadata data frame. And we're merging on series ID.
Additionally, we're going to rename the CPS labor force status column as variable.
And then we're only going to keep variable, date time, and value.
Perfect. Okay, great. So now what we're going to do is we're going to want to be able to
generate kind of plots of the data that start at a particular date and allow us to compare two
time periods to each other. So what this function is going to do is it's going to give us,
is it's going to take a data frame as an input, a start date, and a number of days.
And it's going to give us out a data frame that's going to be a copy of this original data frame.
And it's only going to have values that start after start date. And it's only going to keep
the dates that are within end days of that start date. So let's see how that works. So the first
thing we do is compute days from. So say, for example, this was January 1st 2007.
If start date was January 1st 2007, then this would be equal to zero. So this is we're going to do
this on a whole series. But we're going to talk about it as a, we're a stale example. But if the
start date were still January 1st 2007, and the date were February 1st 2007, then this would give us
31. So then we're only going to keep days that come after a, a, a are greater than or equal to zero.
The start date. And we're not going to go so far in the future because we're going to limit it
to being less than end days in the future. And then we're going to create a copy of our data frame.
We're going to save this days from into our data frame. And then we're only going to keep the
dates that we've specified below. Okay, so let's go ahead and see what this function does. So when we
apply this, notice we now only have values dates starting at 2012. And if we asked for the maximum,
it shouldn't be more than five years in advance. So we have 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, and all of 2016. So
five years. So it does what we said. And I think it becomes even easier to see what this function does
by looking at a pivot table. So what we're going to do is we're going to put the dates on the index.
We're going to put our different variables. So these EE employed unemployed EU, etc. on the columns.
And then we're going to fill it with the values. We'll create a new column called labor force.
And then we're going to modify our EEU, UE and UU rates to be percent of employed or unemployed.
And then we'll look at this data frame. Okay, so again, if we look at PTNT.Tale,
we can see it ends in 2016. So our data starts in 2012 and goes to 2016. And we have EE is now the
percent of employed individuals who continue to be employed. EU is the percent of employed
individuals who become unemployed. UE is the percent of unemployed individuals who become
employed. And UU is the percent of unemployed individuals who become who continue unemployed.
And the reason these don't quite add up to 100% is because we're ignoring the
possibility of transitioning out of the labor force. So any difference between UE,
UE and one is one that would be UN. So transitioning from unemployed to not in the labor force.
Okay, so let's go ahead and make a plot. So what we're plotting here is kind of,
so we view 2012 to 2016 through 2016 as a relatively normal economic time. So this is a time in which
the United States is not experiencing any recession. Rather, it had slow sustained growth.
So you can see the unemployed to employed rate is roughly 20% of the unemployed were finding jobs
in a given month. So that's relatively good. And the employment to unemployment transition rate
was kind of in the 1 to 2% and didn't move around too much. So this gives us a benchmark of what
kind of these rates should look like during a normal times. So what we're going to do now is,
let's go ahead and look at some turbulent times. So we're going to start our plots of turbulent times,
one year prior to the trough of unemployment. We actually, so we did this approximately,
but actually writing code to find the trough would be a great exercise if you're looking for
some pandas practice. So we're going to start our plots in March 2019 and February 2007.
And so we're going to only keep, and we're going to keep five years. So obviously for COVID,
this won't, we only have a year and a half of data that we can plot.
This assign is just equivalent to doing something like DF COVID, EE is equal to
DFCOVID.EVAL EE divided by employed. But it allows us just to kind of continue our
chained approach. So that's why we did that. Great. So this is exactly what we did to our normal times
data frame. So let's go ahead and look at just kind of the raw changes in employment and
unemployment. So prior to this year, the great recession had been one of the most devastating
economic events in kind of US history for a long time. And what you see is, remember,
so the event is going to start about 365 days after the plot starts. So what you see is kind of
at its worst, the total number of unemployed was about 15 million during the great recession.
And that kind of, it took us approximately, so one, so approximately two years after the
recession started, we hit the peak number of unemployed people. And it's just so striking to see
kind of, so we'll call this the start date. Kind of in a matter of two months, we saw a significantly
larger increase in the unemployment. So reaching kind of about 20 million people unemployed.
And what you're seeing is we're now seeing a relatively quick, I guess we'll call it a recovery,
and we're seeing lots of people returning to work. And that could be because they're being called
back to work from a job they were temporarily laid off on, or maybe there's new jobs being created.
But there's still kind of a long ways to go. So we're not, we're still a long ways away from our
original level of unemployment. And so this plot is going to be more comparable to what we just saw
for the normal times a second ago. And we're going to plot the employment to unemployment transition
and the unemployment to employment transition rate. So during normal times, again, roughly two percent
of the unemployed find a job. So this is just the mean from that last plot that included the data
from 2012 to 2016. And what you see was during the Great Recession, there was kind of a period of
prolonged a prolonged decrease in job finding. So notice it's below the normal times level for
kind of years afterwards. And what we're seeing here, so again, so this should be we are experiencing
growth prior to both of these events. So we're seeing initially these rates, this U2E rate was higher.
In both cases. And then what you see in the kind of COVID recession is you see a really large drop
in finding jobs for just a couple of months. And we've actually seen, so it jumped down, but now we've
actually seen an increased rate of job finding, which I think is really interesting.
And I think this is probably something that we've seen in many places all over the world.
And then the other plot is kind of this employed to unemployed. So what percentage of the
employed were losing their jobs? So again, during the Great Recession, this actually, so prior to
this, this graph, prior to the COVID experience, this graph looked much more striking because what
you saw was effectively the employment to unemployment transition rate increased by 150%.
And what you see is kind of people were losing their jobs at a slightly higher rate for a very long time.
But kind of a slightly higher rate does not look like basically a six five or six times increase.
This is five or six hundred percent people are losing their jobs at the peak of the COVID recession
at effectively a six hundred percent higher rate than they were during normal times.
But what you've seen is actually a lot of the firing has stopped.
So as long as things continue to go well, we actually kind of should expect things to slowly
return to normal because we're seeing higher than normal transitions from unemployment to employment
and approximately normal transitions from employment to unemployment. So I would say kind of in the
long term, these numbers are encouraging and the thing that will be fun is next week will
use a model that will allow us to talk about how fast you might expect things to return to normal
or other things. But we hope you enjoyed this discussion of labor statistics and we'll see you soon.
