Let's now talk about labor statistics. By labor statistics what we mean is the data
that's used to measure and quantify the health of labor markets. So in the United States
one of the main sources for labor statistics is a survey known as the current population
survey. And this survey has been in one version or another, been administered since the late
1930s. And it collects data on kind of demographic and economic characteristics of individuals
and households. The data collected is administered, so this survey is administered to roughly
60,000 households per month. And rather miraculously they achieve an average response rate
of nearly 90%. Because there's about 60,000 households per month, this means that they
have a relatively good sample for geographies such as state and metropolitan statistical area.
But maybe this data isn't particularly accurate for a geographic level like counties.
So one of the strengths of the CPS is it's inherent panel nature. So let's talk about
why that's helpful. So if we have kind of January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November, December.
So here's the 12 months of the year. So in the CPS, if you're once you're selected, you're
interviewed for four consecutive months. And then you're interviewed for four consecutive months
again, eight months later. So let's work through an example. So imagine this is the year 2020. And you
begin being interviewed by the CPS in February, then you're interviewed in February, March, April, and May of 2020.
And then you wait eight months. So not interviewed in June, not interviewed in July, August, September,
October, November, December. And then we come into 2021 January. So you've been out of the sample
for eight months now. And you begin being interviewed again in February, 2021. So then you're
interviewed again February, March, April, and May. So one of the strengths is that this results in
you being interviewed during the same set of months in two different years. And additionally, because
of this, you can track someone for consecutive months. So you could see whether someone in March had
lost the job that they currently that they had had in February or how their income might have changed,
etc. So this panel nature makes the CPS really helpful for asking lots of different labor market
questions. So what types of things are asked? The CPS collects information on demographics and
labor status mostly. So they'll ask you things like how many people live in the household?
What are the sex, age, and race of these different people? And what's the relationship between
each set of people? So this tells you things like our grandparents living in the house with their
children and their grandchildren. It tells you whether the other people in the house are dependent
of the head of the household or whether they're their children, etc. It also collects information on
whether you're working, whether you're working full-time or part-time. It gets an estimate of your
hourly pay and how many hours you work. They ask about whether you're looking for work,
how you're looking for work, whether you're retired, or whether you have any other disabilities. And they
ask lots of other things. You can actually find their exact questionnaires online at the link in this
notebook. So who uses the CPS? Well the truth is lots of people do. The one we're going to be talking
about mostly today is the Bureau of Labor Statistics and they issue a jobs report once a month based
on the numbers collected by the current population survey. Additionally, because this data is open,
researchers, anyone can access the micro data behind the CPS so you could collect these surveys and
track these people on your own. And actually, additionally, there's lots of private companies that
use this information for their own decision making. Okay, so the next thing we're going to do is we're
going to talk about some of the common terms used in labor statistics. So employed means an individual
who did any work at all as a paid employee, whether they worked if they worked in their own business,
worked on their own farm, or if they worked 15 or more hours as unpaid workers and a family members
business. And then part time is an individual who usually works less than 35 hours per week. A full
time individual is someone who usually works 35 or more hours per week. And both of these definitions
are defined across all jobs. So if someone had what they considered two part time jobs,
they were 20 hours a week each, they would be considered a full time worker.
Unemployed means an individual who is not employed and was available to work and made an active
effort to find employment during the four week period ending with the survey reference week.
The labor force is the sum of the employed and unemployed individuals. The unemployment rate
is the number of unemployed people as a percentage of the labor force. And those not in the labor force
are individuals aged 16 and older who were neither employed nor unemployed. And you can find more
detail about each of these definitions in the BLS documentation. The last thing we're going to talk
about are kind of definitionally that is going to be things we'll call the transition rates.
And so these are key statistics that people use to analyze how the labor economy is churning
for lack of a better word. So there's four different rates that we'll talk about. There's the E to E
which is the fraction of people who were employed during the current month and in the last month.
E to U are the people who transitioned from employed to unemployed. The U to E which is the people
who transitioned from the unemployed to the employed and the U to U which is the fraction of
people who were unemployed and continued to be unemployed. And if we hold the labor force constant,
what we get is that E E plus E U plus U E plus U U is equal to one. And you can add additional
states. So for example, we could have an E N rate which would be the number of people who,
fraction of people who were employed previously and transitioned into not in the labor force.
There's something like that, but we're just going to focus on these four.
And I think this raises a natural question and kind of there's two ways to increase unemployment.
You could either see a decrease in what we'll call kind of the job finding rate which is the
transition rate from unemployed to employed or an increase in the firing rate or in the separation
rate I guess we'll call it which is an increase in the rate of employed to unemployed.
And so kind of in the back of your mind as we work through today's lecture and next week's lecture,
we want you to be thinking about which of these channels will have a larger effect on unemployment
levels. And we'll ask you to do this formally next class. So the question we're going to ask today
with the data that we download is going to be how changes in the transitions rates changed between
changed during two periods of economic turbulence in the United States. So we're going to analyze the
great recession and the current pandemic to explore how these different rates changed.
And in particular we saw large increases in unemployment and unemployment and we're going to see
what happened to the UE and the UE rates during these two times of economic turbulence.
So we'll do that at the end of class.
