This notebook is going to be about data visualizations and it's going to talk
about some rules and guidelines. Whereas our previous discussion was focused on
how to create a graph. This discussion will be focused on creating the right
graph or creating a compelling graph. This material I'd like to preface was
co-authored with Paul Schrimff who's at UBC and what we're going to do is we're
going to understand what steps go into creating a visualization. We'll
identify when is the right time to use each of the core types of plots and we'll
introduce the ability to make effective visualizations. And so we'll start by
doing our normal imports and we'll start. So an economist or a data scientist
job goes beyond simply learning new things using data and theory. Learning
new things is actually a way to help economists or data scientists communicate
these ideas to others. And the medium in which these ideas are communicated is
typically an academic paper or a business meeting. And the most effective way
to communicate ideas is via well done visualizations. Well done visualizations
allow you to communicate through two main channels. The first is something that
psychology researchers call pictures superiority. And what this is is in
work in psychology they've found that individuals are able to identify
pictures they had previously studied for approximately 500 milliseconds each
with 75 to 85% accuracy but when they ran the same experiment with words
individuals could only identify things that they had previously seen with a
55 to 65% accuracy. So you're seeing an ability what they want to convey here is
that pictures stay in an individual's mind better than words. Additionally
data visualizations are a way to help people walk through the logic that you
used to build your chart. And this allows them to reason through the argument
you're presenting. And it makes your claim more convincing because now you're
not telling them all you're doing them is showing them the data and they
arrive at the conclusion you wanted to make on their own. So throughout this
lecture we're going to discuss the process of creating a data data visualization
and we'll communicate some of the best ways to ensure that you can successfully
communicate your ideas. Along the way we'll be introduced to many additional
features of MATPLATLIB that have not been previously discussed. Obviously we
won't be able to discuss all of these features but we encourage you to go back
and continue to read and study the MATPLATLIB online documentation. So before
we begin discussing specific recommendations we'd like to start by doing two
things. The first is let's re-emphasize what the goal of data visualization is
and the second is let's develop a process by which we can create compelling
data visualizations. So the purpose of a data visualization is to facilitate the
communication of a message or idea. So the whole purpose for which we create
graphs is to help communicate things that we know that someone else may not know.
And the steps by which we find our most effective are to do the following four
things. You start by identifying what is the message that you would like to
communicate. Second, you should describe to yourself in words the ideas that
should be communicated by your visualization. So you should say things like I'd
like to have dots that show the relationship between x and y and the fact that
they are increasing means x. Three, you should create a draft of your
visualization and this actually gives you a chance to verify your data and to
verify that the story you're trying to tell is in your data. Finally, you
fine tune the visualization details and remove any information or any piece of
graph or color or line that will distract from the message that you're trying
to tell. We typically think that a graph should be focused on one message and
not on many. Now obviously prior to doing steps 1, 2, 3 and 4, you're going to
have done a significant amount of time exploring the data and thinking about
your message. And in fact, you're going to find that during the research step
which we call step zero, you will actually almost certainly produce visualizations
to help yourself understand the data. These visualizations are great because
they'll allow you to highlight outliers or unlikely combinations. So the steps
we've presented are going to be helpful also in your research process but we're
going to focus on kind of creating visualization after you know the story that
you're going to tell. So let's start by working through an example and the
example we're going to start with is actually it comes from research done by
an economist at MIT named David Otter and his co-authors but it was based and
kind of motivated by a New York Times article that was about the research being
done by Dr. Otter. So this particular research investigates the
observable changes over time between work opportunities in rural and urban
locations. So it turns out that earlier in the 20th century in the 1950s or so
there was a wage premium for both college and non-college educated workers. So
this means that the wage paid to college workers and the wage paid to
non-college workers was higher if you were in a more dense area. So more
recently we've observed that the city wage premium is still apparent for
those with college educations but for those without a college education the
wage premium for living in an urban area has disappeared. So the first step
for creating this visualization is going to be identify the message. So think
about what questions someone should be able to answer after observing your
graph. So in our example we'd like someone to be able to say what happens to
the rural slash urban wage gap for non-college educated workers since the
1950s and the thing that makes this answer unique is that the wage gap
changes are different for non-college educated workers and college
educated workers and we'd like to highlight this difference. So step two
is to visualize. So choosing the type of visualization that will best
illustrate your point is a skill that can only be developed with lots of
practice. Using the wrong type of visualization will actually can actually
inhibit the flow of information from the graph to your audience's brain. And so
in our case one of the most effective ways to demonstrate the relationship of
two variables is using a scatter plot. And so we want to place so now we're
going to describe our visualization words. We're going to place the log of
population density on the x-axis and the log of wages on the y-axis. And what we
should see and we're going to plot this four times. We're going to plot this for
the 1950s, 1960s and so on. And we're going to see how this relationship
changes over time for the college and non-college educated workers. So now we
will we've kind of described in words the graph that we'd like to create. And so
now we should go about and create an early draft. So sometimes you're going to
get and I think this has been a theme in lots of the the processes that we've
discussed. So you're going to get to this step of visualizing your draft and a
lot of times after you've drafted a version of your graph you're going to
realize that you need to go back to step one or step two. It's okay to scrap what
you have and restart. And in fact in our own work we found that it's not uncommon
to discard ten or more versions of a graph before we settle on a draft that
we're happy with. So you're getting the benefit of other people have done this
research and drafted this plot for us. But here is our first version of this
graph. So what you see is in 1950 we have the log of population density. So the
higher this is is the more urban a particular area is. So this is you know
something like New York City which is the most dense location in the United States.
And we're also plotting on the y-axis the log of wages. So the higher the log of
wages is the more the average college or non-college worker is paid in that
area. And the blues are college and the red are non-college. Again this is a
draft so we internally know that and that's good enough. And you'll see in 1980
there is still some kind of urban pre a city premium. So if you live in more
denser locations you're going to be paid more. And in 2000 it's still there but
it starts flattening a little bit. And in 2015 it's continued to flatten but it's
still there for college workers. So this is our draft. And so we're not going to
do this exercise in class today but we'd encourage you to come back to this
notebook after class and to create a draft of this plot but organizing time and
education differently. And we think this draft will tell a different story
probably so we might have two plots instead of four where we have non-college
workers on the left and college workers on the right and we could just plot these
slopes. So each subplot would then have four graphs but we'd like you to come
back and do this on your own. And then once you've done that you should think
about why Dr. Otter and his co-authors chose to organize the information the
way they did with one plot per year. And so why did they do it this way and what
story would the other plot tell? Okay so up until this point we've confirmed
that the decisions we've made have made sense. So the last step is to clean up
the graph and to ensure that nothing distracts from our message. Almost the
entirety of the rest of the lecture is going to be dedicated to fine tuning so
we're not going to talk about the details but this code here creates the plot
that we're going to see below. So what we have is two colors so notice we've
continued to highlight the education levels using different colors. We've now
labeled using the same text college educated workers and non-college
educated workers. We've changed the x-axis so you'll remember on the previous
slide it just was called a density log and it was to values two four six eight
and wages log and values 1.8 2.0 dot dot 3.2. And now we've actually converted
this into average wage rather than log wages but we've plotted them in log
scale and we've done the same thing with population density. So you can actually
see you know nowhere in the United States has 10,000 individuals per square
mile but there's some places that come kind of close. Okay so we've worked
through kind of our process for one graph and we're now going to proceed and
talk about some of the different visualization types and what they and what
types of situations that you would use them. We've found Duke libraries data
visualization guide to be a fantastic resource for thinking about this. So we're
only going to talk about kind of three to five visualization types today but you
can see probably 20 or 30 in this visualization guide and talk they talk about
when they're appropriate to use why you might use them and how they can be used.
So the first one we'll talk about is scatter plots and the reason we're
actually talking about this first is that Edward Tuft once estimated that more
than 70% of all charts in scientific publications are scatter plots. And why
do they do this is because scatter plots are used to show how two variables are
related to one another and to compare various these various observations based
on the two variables. The core strength of a scatter plot is that it's pure
simplicity because you're getting one point per observation just allows the
data to speak for itself. So a plot of two variables will allow viewers to
immediately see whether the variables are linear related, quadratically related,
or maybe not related at all. So we'll demonstrate in another example and
so we have right here a scatter plot of unemployment rates and wages in the
United States and it's kind of tough to see whether there's a relationship. You
think potentially the lower the wage, the higher the unemployment there might be
kind of a downward slope to it. I guess the story there would be in places with
high unemployment they have relatively weak labor markets and so the
average wage at which people are paid is potentially lower. So economically that
kind of makes sense but you get lots of outliers that really I think we can
that story. One thing you'll find that we do to lots of our plots is we actually
turn off the top and right spines. They returned off here anyways probably by...
let's try actively turning them on. So we often find that these lines are
somewhat repetitive here they're not so bad but when you have just a big
black square around your data sometimes it's distracting. We have these lines
across the graph that are used for comparison so it doesn't look so out of
place here. Here I think we could use true or false and not run into too much
trouble. The other thing we had previously talked about using annotations and
so we've annotated each of our cities and we've kind of done this by hand. So we
said San Francisco we'd like to move 35 points to the left and 10.5 points down
Atlanta, Phoenix and Madison we're going to move down and to the left a little bit.
Otherwise we're going to move it up into the right a little bit so that's
places like Seattle and we chose not to use any arrows or anything but you're
able to see you know using the scatter plot the data. So the next type of
plot we'll discuss are line plots and so line plots are best used to show how a
variable evolves over time or it can also be used like a scatter plot to
demonstrate the relationship between variables and it's important to note
that it's going to differ from how a scatter plot displays this information
because it's not very practical to draw a line between all of your data points.
So if we go back to this plot if we tried to represent this with a line plot
you would get something that looked slightly funny. It's actually so in the
paper and in his slides Dr. Otter and his co-authors actually draw a least
squares line representing the best fit and they use both the scatter plot and
the line plot to convey their the relationship between the two variables. So let's
go ahead and see right and so we've now replicated this by we're placing the
lines on the plot by running this regression and what you're seeing is that now
you can physically see that the line is getting more and more shallow for the
non-college educated workers and it's not getting any less steep and
probably getting steeper for the college educated workers. Next we're going to
talk about bar plots. So bar plots are used to display differences for a
variable between groups. So it's really about kind of how does group one
compared to group two. It can also be used to show how variable changes over time
which you know changes over time is just you know a difference as grouped by
time. So that's a subset of what we previously said. So bar charts use the
differences show the differences by using the length of each bar and this makes
comparing different groups very straightforward. So in this plot below we're
going to show the unemployment rate in different US cities and we've sorted it
on our own so that the cities are sorted but if it was not sorted you would be
able to quickly identify whether Detroit or New York had higher unemployment
simply by comparing the length of these lines and so you can see Detroit's line
is slightly longer it goes slightly above four and New York's line is slightly
below four so you can tell that Detroit has a higher unemployment rate than New
York. And histograms are the last type of visualization that we'll talk about.
So histograms try to display the distribution of a single variable. So we think
that histograms are particularly important when your variable is not
normally distributed because typically you know when we think of means and
variances we're thinking about a normal distribution. So our plot below is
going to show US GDP growth from 1948 to 2019 and we're going to plot the GDP
growth the distribution of GDP growth. So what you'll see is that the average is
kind of in the high ones to 2% or so but you actually have kind of a long tail
of high growth and a left tail that can start to get fat. So but you can see
very clearly what this distribution looks like. And so we can change so here we've
plotted with 23 bins we could increase this to 50 and that gives us a slightly
different plot and so the number of bins that goes into your histogram will
affect what your graph looks like and there's some recommendations that people
have made about what's the right number of bins to use for different data sets.
Okay so those are the different plots that one can use and now we're going to
talk about how to choose colors for your plots and we really like what Edward
Tufft has to say about this. So he says avoiding catastrophe becomes the first
principle in bringing color to information above all do no harm. So the question
is how do we do no harm. So to talk about how to do no harm we're first
going to introduce a way in which we can reason about colors and this
paradigm to reason about colors is called the hue saturation value paradigm. So I
don't know how you would have previously been introduced to colors but lots of
times on a computer they're represented by red, green and blue values and they
call these RGB values and the reason they do this is that in color theory
theoretically all colors can be created by combining red, green and blue.
Kind of that is a great theory in kind of theory land but practically it
actually creates lots of difficulties on a computer and so we'll introduce
you to what hue saturation value discusses colors. So the first is hue and this
is going to represent the share of each primary color as angles around a
circle. So red will begin at zero degrees, green begins at 120 degrees and
blue begins at 240 degrees. Matt Platt lib so in practice is going to convert
these back to numbers between zero and one by dividing by 360. And so different
angles between these colors are going to be different mixes of primary colors.
Satya race is going to describe how rich a color is also using the numbers
between zero and one. Saturation one which one would call full saturation the
color is as rich as possible. Saturation the color has no color and is an
approximately a projection of the color into grayscale. This isn't exactly true
but it's a good way to reason about this and then value is going to be how dark
a color is. It's also represented with numbers from zero to one and you should
think about this is how much black has been added to the color. So if a color
has value zero then it is as dark as possible aka the color black and if the
color has a value one then it's had no black added to the color and it's just
the original color. So let's look at the following demonstrate at the
following figure. We can see moving around this circle so this would be
somewhere around here would approximately be zero degrees and so it starts as
red as we move we wind up at 120 degrees which is blue and as we continue
going around our circle we would end up here at 240 degrees and so this part
that's cut out would be our greens and then we'd complete our circle and we'd
come back to 360 which is zero degrees. Now the saturation is kind of how rich
this color is so notice that if we completely desaturate the color and we have
no black added to the color right here at the top center is the color white and
then as we move the value to one we end up at a very black color and lots of
these along along here is we move along what I'll call pure grays which are
colors which are grays that have no color added to them so they're they have
no red they have no blue they have no green and so and then we can see kind of
we've already discussed this but value is the lower we go in value moving
towards zero is the more black the color is in so when value is set to zero it's
all black and we can see that in this very bottom section of our of our
little image so next let's go ahead and demonstrate this so we've created a
little function here called color swatches and it's going to create a bunch of
colors and then plot them and what we're going to do is we're going to very
different pieces of the HSV's the hue saturation values and convert them to
RGB's and then we're going to plot them so here we're going to set the
saturation and the value to one so there will be no black added and it will be
as rich of a color as possible and we'll move from zero to 360 in six steps we
could potentially do more steps and you'll see that we see these colors
so we can just see the circular nature that as we change hue it goes from red to
green to blue to red so let's now fix for a particular color so let's set it to
zero which is going to be red and let's plot some varying saturation so when
our saturation is zero there's no color in that particular color so it's
right and as we add red we get kind of a richer and richer red we could do
this for green which is at 0.33 or blue which is at 0.66 and we see the same
thing that as we add saturation we get a richer and richer color next as you
might guess we can also vary value so we'll start at zero and so there has been
no zero is going to be black and as we increase the value we're adding less
and less black to our color so this red should be the same as this red which
is the same as these reds but now it's moving as we change value from black to
red and we could also do this with green or blue and we see the same thing
okay so now that we understand kind of how color works let's think about what
kind of color palettes are going to help us emphasize information in a
data visualization so if we're thinking about qualitatively different groups
where we just want to identify separate groups but we don't want to describe a
quantitative relationship between them you could fix a saturation and draw
and evenly spaced values from hewspac so all you need is that the different
groups have different colors you could also think about what happens if you
want to show that a particular color maybe color does matter in your plot
then you might want to vary the saturation so as you make your red darker maybe
that's a higher and higher value so lots of times you'll see chloroplyph maps
that have this so you can see so map plot lib and other Python packages actually
have lots of different color palettes for you to choose from so again
referring to map plot lib documentation we can talk about some of the different
ways that color maps are used so sequential will be incrementally changing the
lightness and often the saturation of the color so this is used to
represent information that has some kind of ordering so this is what I was
saying that we could make a value darker and darker in order to display that
one place has a higher value than another you could have a diverging so this
should be used when information being plotted has some kind of a critical
middle value so again this is if you think about a chloroplyph map if you want
to see which states have had in the United States which states have positive GDP
growth and which states have negative GDP growth you might make the middle
color zero and then as you become more negative it becomes more red and it
becomes more positive it might become blue or green
cyclic is going to change the lightness of two different colors that meet in
the middle and beginning at the beginning slash end at an unsaturated color so
this is going to be information that wraps around at its end points such as
phase angles or wind direction also time of day and then qualitative are just
miscellaneous colors that are going to not represent any ordering but rather
just allow you to create groups most of the examples we've used so far have
just used qualitative color maps because they're simply meant to distinguish
between different observations and the color is not meant to say anything about
how they differ so there's three excellent sources of information on colors
and colors pallets we think seaborne which is another Python plotting package
that builds on matplotlib is a great place their documentation is a great place
to talk about colors this talk given at the sci-fi conference in 2015 by
Nathaniel Smith is actually one of my favorite discussions of colors and is
one of the things that really forced me to think carefully about the colors
that I'm using in my plots and then this last is a website that was literally
put together by rock and scientists at NASA who felt it was important enough
that other people at NASA were using colors the right way and so they developed a
website that described how it should be used okay so we've now kind of put
forward some background on colors and we can use this as a common language and
proceed with discussing how to use color effectively so this is do no harm so one
of the first things we'd like to emphasize is sometimes value varying value
which is the darkness of a particular color is more effective than hue so this
example actually comes from the NASA site that we linked to previously and
let's just look at this plot so this is a plot that has a bunch of words and
lines it has you can see the word important second order not important but it's
kind of hard to distinguish between all of these so one thing that someone might
choose to do is they might try to make this more readable by varying the color so
now everything that's important is red everything that second order is green
and everything that's not important is blue well yeah and so I'm not sure I'm
not sure using color here actually makes this graph any better I I can probably
read the first graph better than I can the second there's green in particular I
feel like was a very ineffective choice but the last way that we could use colors
is instead of using just pure black or varying the hue we could vary the value and
so what we're going to do now is the most important information will make a
dark color and then the second order information we make slightly less dark and
the information that's not important we make the lightest and at least me
personally I found that this last graph of these three is the most readable and
so again we want to emphasize that the point of this exercise is not to not
use color in your plots but we want to encourage you to think about whether
hue or value will be more effective in communicating your message and in this
case for this particular plot value was a better way to highlight what was
important and what was not important okay the next thing we'll talk about is
that being careless with values can actually make grayscale impossible to read so
lots of the plots that you produce whether that be kind of an annual report that
goes out from a particular business or an academic paper will eventually be
printed and the majority of printing happens in black and white and so if you're
not careful in choosing your colors they're going to have the same projected
values and once they've been converted to grayscale they'll be unidentifiable
so this code is based on an example from the matplotlib documentation I think
we we change the color so we can see here we have a purple for men and an orange
for women and if we convert that image to grayscale we end up with the
following graph and so you quickly see kind of what the problem was is these two
colors were too close to one another and so again very different in terms of
hue but their values were very close together and so when you converted it to
grayscale you ended up with a gray that was very close to one to another and
so you can't tell in this graph what the difference between men and women is
because you don't know which line which bark responds to which and so so you
say it kind of who would do this and the answer is that in a in a pretty
prominent newspaper the editor happened to review all of their graphs in black
and white and they printed this graph talking about the US elections in 2012 so
these are supposed to be some kind of a red and blue I'm sure but when they
converted to grayscale they all look the same color and so no one knows what
this what this graph is saying and this actually comes from on a side note a
blog called flowing data we also encourage you to read pieces of this blog they
have some great posts and some great examples of what not to do so please
don't do this whatever you do we feel we will feel like we have failed you if
you ever produce a graph that looks like this okay so the next point we'd like
to talk about is you should use color to draw attention so if you're displaying
information about various groups but you're really only interested in how one
group differs from the remain from all the others then you should just choose
some close together hues to represent all of the less important groups and a
distinct color to display the group of interest so we're going to start with
this plot and obviously we have the group of interest is going to be red and
we're going to plot the others in kind of various shades of green and blue so
that's pretty good so we'll talk about how we can improve a graph like this in
a couple of slides but you can see that this makes it clear what we're trying to
study so the next thing next bullet point we'd like to talk about is don't use
color to differentiate small objects so color is a great differentiator when
there's enough of the color to see but if it ever becomes too small it just
becomes really difficult so here's the same plot we showed on the previous
graph but we've now made the dot size much smaller and so I think here you can
kind of make out where this is you can still see the group of interest but it
becomes much harder to read so there is a lesson to be learned here I don't
know if you could have told me that this was a red color but because it's so much
darker than some of the other colors you can still separate out that group so
keep that in mind as you produce graphs the next thing we'd like to talk about
is that certain colors have connotations so for example red is typically
denoted to represent losses and black is denoted to represent profits so
choosing red to be denote positive profits in black to denote negative
profits would be a very bad would be a bad choice because this you know should
just feel a little bit weird if you're looking at profits in red the same
plot I think becomes much more intuitive if you just make the losses red and
the others black the last thing we'd like to say about color is that nearly one
and ten men have some form of color blindness the most prevalent form of color
blindness actually makes differentiating between red and green difficult so
besides making your plots feel Christmas themed using red and green to
illustrate differences in a plot will often make your visualization difficult to
follow for some of your audience there are Python libraries that allow you to
simulate different forms of color blindness and we recommend reading about this
on the documentation for color spacious and Viz cm so we've now discussed some
guidelines for color and what we're going to do now is discuss some guidelines
for what elements to include and how to structure your graphs we think these are
very much guidelines in the sense that they can and should be violated
sometimes but you should be able to explain why you violated each of these
particular rules the main theme of these guidelines is to keep your plot as
simple as possible in an attempt to make your plot eye catching lots of people
destroy the message that's contained in the graph so again we're going to
focus on some guidelines that we feel are the most abused but there have been
lots of good books and blogs that have been written on this we've already linked
to these books in the previous notebook on plotting but you should also check
out the following blogs flowing data in particular is a favorite of mine and
so as you begin to create visualizations you'll see examples either in news
articles or on these blogs and we actually recommend kind of storing this
information away because seeing how others display information ensures that
kind of in the future when you run into a similar problem that you have something
to call on that you can say oh I've seen a plot that does something like this
let me see if I can find it one friend of ours actually takes this very
seriously he has a organized binder of graphics organized by topics and type
of graph and when he's creating presentations he'll actually sit with this
binder and his drafts of plots and he'll just flip through the binder for hours
and he'll find graphs that he thought were well done and that's a way that he
prepares his presentations a couple more links are just a couple more links
about creating good visualizations this financial times article is great this
article we've linked to on towards data science is an it doesn't accept
a job at redesigning graphics that were originally done very poorly and then
we'll link again to this data this Duke library data visualization guide they
have a few concise rules that are also worth reviewing so let's look at some
recommendations for bar plots so Donna Wong in her Wall Street's guide for
visualization advises against zebra patterns and instead she proposes that you
use different shades of the same color ordered from lightest to darkest so in
this plot we're using different shades of blue starting in a very light shade
and moving to a darker shade in alphabetical order in this case and we've
then put a legend at the top to associate each bar with a particular country
and again and additionally the general consensus is that starting a bar plot at
any number beside zero is a misrepresentation of the data because it's going to
make the relative lengths of different bars look differently so let's look at
a plot that originally came from the flowing data blog and this was a plot
that a news organization in the United States published in you know I think
it was 20 20 they wrote this article in 2012 and so they compared the bush
tax cuts so they tax rate that the highest income tax an individual could pay
was going to move from 35% to 39% but if you look at this bar plot it actually
looks like the tax rate was going to increase by you know 500% because it was
going to go up so much if you make this same plot but you start at zero you
actually notice that while this is a non-trivial increase you know we're seeing
a 5 to 10% increase in our tax rates it does not look like a 500% increase and
we'll actually come back this graphic that was originally published had all
kinds of terrible things and additionally we what voiced them now but we have
opinions about what type of person uses all caps in their graphs they're not
good opinions I'll say that the next rule and you may or may not have heard
this before but you actually should just generally avoid pie plots and the
reason is that when you're comparing groups it's much easier for a reader to
compare the height on a bar chart than it is to compare the size of different
angles in a pie chart so let's see an example so on the left we have a bar
plot and on the right we have a pie chart in both cases you can clearly tell
that Charlie ate the most and we've helped emphasize this by adding different
colors to Charlie but if we are trying to figure out whether Alice Bob or Susan
ate more I can't really tell I think maybe Susan had the most and then then
bought yeah I just I think it's it's pretty tough to tell in any case except
for the most obvious so if you were making the case that Charlie ate too much of
the pie and should pay more than his and equal split split the pie chart can
help you make this point the bar plot also makes that point so in general avoid
pie charts when you create line charts you should try and avoid fitting too much
information into a single line plot we see lots of people do this and the thing
that we think is important that a visualization should have one main message and
you should not dilute or pollute your message with extra information so in an
example below we're going to come back and revisit our age dependency ratio and
this is going to be the number of individuals aged 65 plus divided by the
number of individuals who are aged 15 to 64 so if you have a high age dependency
ratio the government will have a smaller tax base to collect from but will have
higher health and pension expenditures to pay from the old so we download the
data and we create the plot so this is kind of every developed country in the
world and we've plotted their age dependency ratios from 1960 to 2015 and I
guess you can see that Japan does have the highest age dependency ratio it also
looks like lots of other countries are increasing except for whatever this one
is down here but there's lots of colors and I just think this isn't a very good
graph so yeah our particular message gets hidden or polluted by so much noise
so if we wanted to illustrate that Japan is different than any of the other
developed countries we might plot Japan in dark red and notice we've also made
this line thicker and we've plotted all of the other developed countries in a
light gray line so you can see that they're there but they're not emphasized so
much so this is clearly an improvement but we think it can be better so
again placing this many lines is definitely an exception to our rule and we
think it looks okay here but we could also make this point by simply plotting a
few different lines so here we see that Japan diverges drastically from the
UK US China and India but again we think it's distracting to have so many
different types of line styles and so now we can just do a slightly different
version where all of these countries are in the same color to kind of visually
group them together we've labeled them with text so you know what's being
plotted and then we plot Japan on its own and we think of the plots either this
plot or this plot are the most effective at conveying how Japan's age
dependency ratio is different than other developed countries it's important to
use easy to interpret increments so here we're going to create the same plot
twice but in one case we're going to use tick increments of 0, 3, 6, 9, 12 on the
other we'll use 0, 5, 10, 15 if you're trying to figure out where this line crossed
four here you'd see it happened just after 15 and maybe in the 16 range here it
looks like it happens also in the 16 range but it just it looks a little
weird to have something that's not relatively even there there's there's
basically no reason to ever use a background color in your visualization lots of
research has shown that white or very light graze provide the best contrast so
we'll revisit our favorite plot and again you can't you can't make up some
of the colors that have been chosen but in this case you know we've now moved
it's at least 0 starting at 0 so the change doesn't feel too big but just the
blue I think really distracts your eyes and it takes away from looking at the
bar charts and I think this graph is much more compelling when you remove the
background color you just it takes up you don't get distracted by what's
happening around the data you just immediately are drawn to what was the data
now and what is the data on January 1st 2013
so here's one that some people will find a bit controversial so it turns out
that people use legends quite frequently but many visualization experts advise
you not to use them so the first so the first person that really conveyed this
to me was a professor at NYU named Dave Bacchus and we were working on a
paper together and every time I created a graph with legends he would send it
back to me and with just the words take out legends and then I'll look at it
and so so I didn't quite understand it but over time I've understood why
legends have particular weaknesses so when you rely solely on like line color
the black and white version of your plot becomes somewhat useless because you
don't know whether the colors will be distinguishable in grayscale legends are
going to require people to distinguish between small samples of color so when
you have lines on a line plot you don't get a really good you know thick sample
of what that color is and so someone with a weak eyesight or with color blindness
this makes interpreting the graph very difficult and the third point is that
it adds distance between the data and its description and so this is going to
force people to look at a line and then look back at the legend and then look
at the line and look at the legend and this I think distracts from their
ability to digest the story quickly and succinctly whereas if you simply
labeled your lines you're observing the information all at once and you're
not having to look back and forth across different pieces of the graph so so we're
going to go back to our plot from before our Japan's aging population plot and
when we add a legend this is what it looks like and when we just use labels it
looks like this and I think this is a much more structured plot you can see
what's happening in the UK and the US and here you know first of all all these
lines are the same color so you have no idea where they line up and then except
for Japan I don't know this is just an objectively better plot we want to
continue to emphasize this so we just we wanted to put this in its own bullet
point but you should limit the amount of information you provide in any single
plot don't provide your audience with an information overload and then our
last guideline is that we encourage you to talk with others about your
visualization the best way to determine whether other people understand your
message is to show them and talk to them about it
